# MOS 6502 MPU

## History

The 6502 was designed by much of the same people that designed the 6800 processor at Motorola, one of which were the now well known Chuck Peddle. Design of the 6800 started in 1971 and it was subsequently released in late 1974 at around $300 per unit (this would however be less in larger quantities). At the same time, in meetings with customers, Peddle found that they were put off by the high cost and didn’t need all the features of it anyway. Thus he wanted to design a cheaper processor that didn’t waste silicon and cost on fancy features, and he started work on such a processor at Motorola. At this time however, Motorola had other problems to think about and weren’t interested in Peddles low-cost processor and ordered him by an official letter to stop working on it. Peddle responded by informing Motorola that this letter represented an official declaration of abandonment and that the intellectual property he had developed was now his. Looking for funding for his project, he soon found MOS Technology that immediately understood the potential. As of August 1974 he and a handful of other engineers that worked on the 6800 left Motorola for MOS and started to work on the new processor. They set a price goal of $5 per unit in volume, and the rest, as they say, is history.. 

The first processors in the range were the 6501 and 6502, the 6501 being bus-compatible with Motorola's 6800. When Motorola heard about them via the press release, they promptly filed a lawsuit, claiming patent infringement and misappropriation of trade secrets. As MOS didn’t have the money to oppose, they had to settle the case out of court and agreed to drop the bus-compatible 6501, pay Motorola $200.000, and return documents that Motorola held as confidential. Both companies then agreed to cross-license processor patents.

## Anatomy

Both the dropped 6501 and the 6502 are 40-pin packages but with different pin configurations. The 6502 having 16 address bus pins and 8 data bus pins, R/W (read/write, active low), SYNC (high when a new instruction is about to begin), SO (set overflow, immediately sets the overflow flag in the status register when transitioning from high to low), RDY (halts the processor when held low unless a memory write is being performed), RES (reset, halts the processor when held low and starts the reset sequence when it goes high again), NMI (causes a non-maskable interrupt when transitioning from high to low), IRQ (causes an interrupt when held low unless the interrupt-disable flag is set in the status register).

Internally it has an 8 bit ALU with carry and three registers that can be directly manipulated with instructions; the accumulator A used for arithmetic and logic operations and two index registers X and Y used for indexing addressing modes. There is also a stack pointer S, a status register P containing the processor status flags, the program counter PC and an instruction register IR containing the current opcode. All the registers are 8-bit except the PC which is 16-bit.

The 16-bit address bus and program counter allows the processor to address 64kB of RAM usable for both program code and data. The stack pointer is only 8-bit however; limiting the stack to only 256 bytes at address $0100. To mitigate the relatively low number of registers, many of the instructions have special ”zero page” addressing modes, allowing the first page of 256 bytes in RAM to be effectively used as extra 8-bit data registers (saving one cycle compared to using an absolute 16-bit address), or, with the special zero page indirect addressing mode, as 16-bit pointers.

## Addressing modes

|Mode        |Example    |Size|Operation                                                              |
|:-----------|:----------|:---|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|implied     |INX        |1   |Operand is implied by the instruction, for example one of the registers|
|accumulator |ASL A      |1   |Operand is implied by the instruction, and is the accumulator A        |
|immediate   |LDA #$12   |2   |Operand is the byte immediately following the instruction              |
|zeropage    |LDA $12    |2   |Operand is the byte in the zeropage address pointed to bythe byte following the instruction|
|zeropage,X  |LDY $12,X  |2   |Operand is the byte in the zeropage address pointed to by the byte following the instruction, incremented by the X register|
|zeropage,Y  |LDX $12,Y  |2   |Operand is the byte in the zeropage address pointed to by the byte following the instruction, incremented by the Y register|
|absolute    |LDA $1234  |3   |Operand is the byte in the address following the instruction (or the address itself in case of JMP, JSR)|
|absolute,X  |LDY $1234,X|3   |Operand is the byte in the address following the instruction, incremented by the X register|
|absolute,Y  |LDX $1234,Y|3   |Operand is the byte in the address following the instruction, incremented by the Y register|
|(indirect,X)|LDA ($12,X)|2   |Operand is the byte at the full adress contained in the zeropage pointed to by the byte (incremented by X) following the instruction|
|(indirect),Y|LDA ($12),Y|2   |Operand is the byte at the full adress (incremented by Y) contained in the zeropage pointed to by the byte following the instruction|
|(indirect)  |JMP ($1234)|3   |Operand is the address at the address pointed to by the two bytes following the instruction (JMP only)|
|relative    |BNE $12    |2   |Branch target is address of the byte following the operand plus its signed offset (Bxx only)|


NOTES:
Addresses (absolute and indirect) are stored in memory in low-byte/high-byte order (little-endian).
Zeropage addresses incremented by X/Y registers always stays in the zeropage (wrap-around). 
Branch offsets are signed 8-bit values -128..+127 ($80..$7F), two’s complement.

## Opcodes

...

## Interrups

There are two main types of interrupts on the 6502, IRQ (interrupt request) and NMI (non-maskable interrupt). There’s also a way to force an interrupt via the BRK instruction, which is similar to an IRQ, except with a special ”break” flag set in the status register saved on the stack. In addition, reset is also handled by the same logic.

The interrupts are prioritised as follows: reset, NMI, IRQ, and BRK.

### RESET
Reset is initiated by setting the RES pin low. This immediately halts the processor and holds it as long as RES is low. When RES goes high again, the reset sequence is started, which will set the I flag in the status register to inhibit interrupts (IRQ only, NMI can still occur) and then fetch the reset vector at 0xFFFC and start code execution there. The only register that will be initialised to a known state is the PC which is fetched from the reset vector, all other registers including the stack pointer will be left in an unknown state and must be initialised by the startup code. This also means that if the processor is reset from a running state all registers will retain their values as they were just before reset (except PC).

### NMI
NMI is edge-sensitive and requires a negative transition (high to low) of the NMI pin. Because of this, once it has gone low no more NMI:s can occur until the pin goes high again (HW 1.3.2.6). Further, NMI must be low for at least two consecutive clock cycles for the interrupt to be recognised (HW 1.4.1.2.9). Unlike IRQ, this interrupt cannot be disabled or ignored in any way (HW 1.3.2.6). When an NMI is triggered, the current instruction will be finished (this also includes an instruction that has just been fetched but not yet started), and then the interrupt sequence will start. The current PC and status register are saved on the stack, the I flag will be set in the status register to inhibit interrupts (IRQ only, NMI can still occur again provided that the NMI pin is released and can transition from high to low again), and then the NMI vector at 0xFFFA is fetched and loaded into PC and code execution will resume there.

### IRQ
IRQ is level-sensitive and must be held low until current instruction is completed for the interrupt to be recognised (HW 1.3.2.4), also the I flag in the status register must not be set (HW 1.3.2.5). When the interrupt is processed the I flag is automatically set to inhibit further interrupts (HW 1.3.2.5). The I flag is set during the last cycle before the processor starts executing the first instruction (i.e. fetch) of the interrupt program (HW 1.4.1.2.9).

### BRK

...

